Tools to analyze and visualize DEMs. (since GDAL 1.7.0)
SYNOPSIS
Usage:

- To generate a shaded relief map from any GDAL-supported elevation raster :
    gdaldem hillshade input_dem output_hillshade
                [-z ZFactor (default=1)] [-s scale* (default=1)]"
                [-az Azimuth (default=315)] [-alt Altitude (default=45)]
                [-b Band (default=1)] [-of format] [-co "NAME=VALUE"]* [-quiet]

- To generate a slope map from any GDAL-supported elevation raster :
    gdaldem slope input_dem output_slope_map"
                [-p use percent slope (default=degrees)] [-s scale* (default=1)]
                [-b Band (default=1)] [-of format] [-co "NAME=VALUE"]* [-quiet]

- To generate an aspect map from any GDAL-supported elevation raster
  Outputs a 32-bit float raster with pixel values from 0-360 indicating azimuth :
    gdaldem aspect input_dem output_aspect_map"
                [-trigonometric] [-zero_for_flat]
                [-b Band (default=1)] [-of format] [-co "NAME=VALUE"]* [-quiet]

- To generate a color relief map from any GDAL-supported elevation raster
    gdaldem color-relief input_dem color_text_file output_color_relief_map
                [-alpha]
                [-b Band (default=1)] [-of format] [-co "NAME=VALUE"]* [-quiet]
    where color_text_file contains lines of the format "elevation_value red green blue"

Notes :
  Scale is the ratio of vertical units to horizontal
   for Feet:Latlong use scale=370400, for Meters:LatLong use scale=111120)


This utility has 4 different modes :

hillshade
    to generate a shaded relief map from any GDAL-supported elevation raster 
slope
    to generate a slope map from any GDAL-supported elevation raster 
aspect
    to generate an aspect map from any GDAL-supported elevation raster 
color-relief
    to generate a color relief map from any GDAL-supported elevation raster 

The following general options are available :

input_dem:
    The input DEM raster to be processed 
output_xxx_map:
    The output raster produced 
-of format:
    Select the output format. The default is GeoTIFF (GTiff). Use the short format name. 
-b band:
    Select an input band to be processed. Bands are numbered from 1. 
-co "NAME=VALUE":
    Passes a creation option to the output format driver. Multiple -co options may be listed. See format specific documentation for legal creation options for each format. 
-quiet:
    Suppress progress monitor and other non-error output. 

Modes
hillshade
This command outputs an 8-bit raster with a nice shaded relief effect. It’s very useful for visualizing the terrain. You can optionally specify the azimuth and altitude of the light source, a vertical exaggeration factor and a scaling factor to account for differences between vertical and horizontal units.

The following specific options are available :

-z zFactor:
    vertical exaggeration used to pre-multiply the elevations 
-s scale:
    ratio of vertical units to horizontal. If the horizontal unit of the source DEM is degrees (e.g Lat/Long WGS84 projection), you can use scale=111120 if the vertical units are meters (or scale=370400 if they are in feet) 
-az azimuth:
    azimuth of the light, in degrees. 0 if it comes from the top of the raster, 90 from the east, ... The default value, 315, should rarely be changed as it is the value generally used to generate shaded maps. 
-alt altitude:
    altitude of the light, in degrees. 90 if the light comes from above the DEM, 0 if it is raking light. 

slope
This command will take a DEM raster and output a 32-bit float raster with slope values. You have the option of specifying the type of slope value you want: degrees or percent slope. In cases where the horizontal units differ from the vertical units, you can also supply a scaling factor.

The following specific options are available :

-p :
    if specified, the slope will be expressed as percent slope. Otherwise, it is expressed as degrees 
-s scale:
    ratio of vertical units to horizontal. If the horizontal unit of the source DEM is degrees (e.g Lat/Long WGS84 projection), you can use scale=111120 if the vertical units are meters (or scale=370400 if they are in feet) 

aspect
This command outputs a 32-bit float raster with values between 0° and 360° representing the azimuth that slopes are facing. The definition of the azimuth is such that : 0° means that the slope is facing the North, 90° it's facing the East, 180° it's facing the South and 270° it's facing the West (provided that the top of your input raster is north oriented). The aspect value -9999 is used as the nodata value to indicate undefined aspect in flat areas with slope=0.

The following specifics options are available :

-trigonometric:
    return trigonometric angle instead of azimuth. Thus 0° means East, 90° North, 180° West, 270° South 
-zero_for_flat:
    return 0 for flat areas with slope=0, instead of -9999 

By using those 2 options, the aspect returned by gdaldem aspect should be identical to the one of GRASS r.slope.aspect. Otherwise, it's identical to the one of Matthew Perry's aspect.cpp utility.
color-relief
This command outputs a 3-band (RGB) raster with values are computed from the elevation and a text-based color configuration file, containing the association between various elevation values and the corresponding wished color. The colors between the given elevation values are blended smoothly and the result is a nice colorized DEM.

The following specifics options are available :

color_text_file:
    text-based color configuration file 
-alpha :
    add an alpha channel to the output raster 

The text-based color configuration file generally contains 4 columns per line : the elevation value and the corresponding Red, Green, Blue component (between 0 and 255). The elevation value can be any floating point value, or the nv keyword for the nodata value.. The elevation can also be expressed as a percentage : 0% being the minimum value found in the raster, 100% the maximum value.

An extra column can be optionnaly added for the alpha component. If it is not specified, full opacity (255) is assumed.

Various field separators are accepted : comma, tabulation, spaces, ':'.

Common colors used by GRASS can also be specified by using their name, instead of the RGB triplet. The supported list is : white, black, red, green, blue, yellow, magenta, cyan, aqua, grey/gray, orange, brown, purple/violet and indigo.

Note: the syntax of the color configuration file is derived from the one supported by GRASS r.colors utility. The alpha component and the support of tablulations and commma as separators are GDAL specific extensions.

For example :

3500   white
2500   235:220:175
50%   190 185 135
700    240 250 150
0      50  180  50
nv     0   0   0   0 

AUTHORS
Matthew Perry <perrygeo@gmail.com>, Even Rouault <even.rouault@mines-paris.org>, Howard Butler <hobu.inc@gmail.com>

Derived from code by Michael Shapiro, Olga Waupotitsch, Marjorie Larson, Jim Westervelt : U.S. Army CERL, 1993. GRASS 4.1 Reference Manual. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Construction Engineering Research Laboratories, Champaign, Illinois, 1-425.
See also
Documentation of related GRASS utilities :

http://grass.osgeo.org/grass64/manuals/html64_user/r.slope.aspect.html

http://grass.osgeo.org/grass64/manuals/html64_user/r.shaded.relief.html

http://grass.osgeo.org/grass64/manuals/html64_user/r.colors.html 